---
layout: post
title: "Starting Up One Last Time"
date: 2016-08-22 00:00:00
catagories: CV
---

Its a late night tonight as I setup the honors network for a smooth
start one last time.  Its been a long summer to make a clean startup
on Void after migrating off of Ubuntu.  Here's what's happened.

So Ubuntu is a fine platform and I still would probably recommend it
for new Linux users.  It worked well for setting up the platform and
was a decent system for a long time.  Where it fell short was in the
usability from an administrative perspective.  The packages are
ancient, the fact that things are linked against gnutls is a real pain
and the community doesn't have great docs for running Ubuntu in the
enterprise.  Overall it was time to move on.

About a year ago I started using Void on my personall laptop and
desktop.  I gained experience with the system and got comfortable
using it on my own systems.  By this point I've had darkstar, the
server that hosts this site, running on Void for about a year now.  It
works really reliably and does what I need, but at the same time there
was some question if I could run the Honors fleet on a rolling release
distro.  Fortunately I have a lot of trust from the staff and Void was
an easy pitch to upgrade to given that it would fix the PDF reader
issues and bring new software to the lounge.

This slow process has brought me to here, I'm sitting in the lounge
with a cleanly running Void network.  This is probably the largest
single deployment of Void in the world right now.  Its pretty cool to
get to work out on the bleeding edge of what is possible, but I have
over the last year been impressed over and over with Void's stability.
I will be interested to see what the year holds and how the system
winds up working.

