---
layout: post
title: Christmas!
date: 2016-12-01 00:00:00
categories: life
---

Its the start of December.  I'm pretty much finished with finals and
projects for this semester.  Because of the stuff for the next
semester this largely represents the end of my undergraduate career.
Its been a long time gettings here and I wouldn't be here without the
help of many people.

Looking back at this semester has had some incredible things:

In September the LUG started up in earnest and I worked to get the
office up and running as a functional space.  There are rumors we may
lose that space but until these are confirmed its going to be a
functional office.

There was the Council sponsored CV trip to the State Fair of Texas.
This was amazing and I couldn't have been happier.  It was a joint
effort between myself, The excellent speaker Andrew S. and my good
friend Gino O.  We orchestrated the transit, tickets, and events
through the day and only managed to lose one freshmen!  Okay, not
really lose but they headed back without telling anyone...

The Halloween festival was amazing, Hailey outdid herself on so many
levels.  There was even a Clue game where attendees had to figure out
who killed Joe by finding clues in the lounge.  People also enjoyed my
'fat chef' costume and seeing me out of my normally gruf SysAdmin
personality for a few hours.  I think sometimes people think that is
my exclusive mode.

And so here I sit.  Its the start of December and as usual I'm in an
empty lounge.  I sometimes wonder if after I leave if there will be
anyone else sitting here late at night; I think not.  Its been an
amazing semester and I've had a great time with my friends.  The
seniors have a dynamic that I don't think the underclassmen have or
share with us, but that's okay.  One last time I'll be here shutting
things down for the Winter rebuild, though with Void it will be only
about a 30 minute process.
