---
title: "Apollo 11"
date: 2019-03-03T21:36:38-08:00
---

I've just gotten back from the Apollo 11 movie, which I saw in IMAX.
The film is a documentary that is all about Apollo 11 and steps you
through in a very linear view the progress of the Apollo 11 mission.
The story is told without narration or interviews, and features many
segments that are shown in real time.

Some of the things that I think are so incredible about this film are
that it shows the people behind the mission.  There are a number of
shots taking in the Launch Control Center showing the rows and rows of
contractors supervising the launch in uniforms with early IBM, Boeing,
RocketDyne, and Lockheed Martin logos that give an almost perfectly
dated feel to the film.  This feel serves to make the film a memorable
experience, especially for someone born after the US Space program had
really wound down its groundbreaking operations.

I have three scenes that I think are my favorite, the first is the
launch of the Saturn V rocket which is shown as a long continuous
shot.  The rocket is shown accelerating through max-Q and the
shock wave is clearly seen attaching later on during the ascent.

The second scene is a fairly short moment where Gene Kranz polls his
team for the go/no go for powered descent.  Kranz is shown on the left
of the massive IMAX screen and as he polls each position the person
appears on the right.  You can truly see the determination of the room
as well as the human aspect of these surprisingly young engineers
committing to the first lunar landing.

Perhaps my favorite scene of all is the actual descent and landing.
The events are shown in real time as a single continuous shot looking
down at the surface of the moon from the LEM.  Despite knowing the
outcome of the mission and even knowing already about the computer
alarms, I found this scene very tense and it generated an appropriate
feel of suspense.  The only information on the screen beyond the
images themselves are a countdown clock of the powered flight
available based on fuel left.

Seriously, go see the movie.
