---
title: "Dialed In: How Small Can You Make Dial-up?"
date: 2021-04-09T15:43:30-07:00
---

I am fascinated by most network technologies, and having spent several
years at this point looking at the latest and greatest I've now
decided to look back at some of the technologies that got us to here.
Circuit switched networks have always fascinated me and as I've
recently gotten into running my own local phone systems, dial-up
networking seemed like the logical place to jump in head-first.

First off, lets define some terms and concepts that are central to
this kind of network.  The best place to start is probably a brief
explanation of circuit switched networks.  Unlike packet switched
networks like Ethernet or Internet Protocol networks which use small
units of data that may take different paths to their destinations,
circuit switched networks are continuous paths that are point to point
and set up and torn down as channels are requested.  This means that
there is a dedicated path from the source to the destination for
information that wishes to flow between those points, but also means
that for every two points that wish to communicate we need another
dedicated circuit.  This would get expensive quickly and so this
isn't quite how the public telephone network works.  The phone network
uses aggregation switches which connect to many subscriber lines and
then peer at a higher level using interconnections called trunks.  A
trunk can carry some fixed number of circuits at any given time,
sometimes referred to as calls or paths.

The most basic trunk for our purposes is a T1 trunk, which is capable
of carrying 24 channels of voice data at 64kbit/s.  If you were to
bond all of these channels together you would get a connection with a
maximum data rate of around 1.5mbit/s.  While this doesn't sound like
much, its guaranteed bandwidth.  This is the major difference between
a circuit switched network and a packet switched one, and why calls
between two traditional landline telephones sound so clear (though you
may not notice it, cell phones and VoIP systems suffer from IP jitter
which causes audible artifacts).  Trunks are the "fat pipes" of the
circuit switched world, and the mechanism by which these pipes are
broken up is called time division multiplexing.  This allows for data
to be shuttled across the network with a minimum possible delay if
all network nodes are locked to the same clock.

Trunks interconnect switches, so lets talk about those.  A phone or
voice switch must be capable of taking an input call, determining the
destination route, and connecting the circuits to each other.  Whereas
IP packets and Ethernet frames use headers to identify their targets,
the phone system uses phone numbers (surprising I know).  These
numbers compose the routing table, referred to as a "dial plan" that
the switch uses to route calls around.  Dial plans can be fairly
direct or complex.  For example, a simple dial plan entry would
connect a given number to a specific physical interface, whereas a
complex entry might rewrite the number, hand it off to another switch,
and change the parameters of the inbound line in some way.  For the
purposes of the voice network supporting my dial-up system, the dial
plan is simple and consists of pointing numbers to the correct
interfaces.

A second important concept to address is that of the Point to Point
Protocol.  This is the mechanism by which data is passed between the
two modems in the call.  Other protocols exist, but PPP is by far the
most common protocol used in this context.  PPP is a layer 2 protocol
which includes authentication, encryption, and compression features.
The scope of PPP is larger than this article, but if you want to learn
more, the protocol is fully specified in RFC 1661.  For the purposes
of dial-up networking, the important part to remember is that PPP is a
direct connection between two network devices with nothing in the
middle.  It is a full duplex connection, and it includes the signaling
necessary for partial auto-configuration of the client.

Now that we have some context, lets look at the topology of the
network and what the different parts do.

For a dial-up system, there are 3 key parts, there's the customer
equipment consisting of a terminal and modem, the switched telephone
network in the middle, and the ISP's equipment at the other end.
We'll go through each component in turn and how they work in some
detail.

At the customer end there are two easily identifiable parts.  There's
a terminal or computer of some description and a modem.  The computer
is responsible for speaking the PPP protocol and providing an
interface for IP communications over the link.

The modem is really the interesting piece of equipment at this end.
The modem is responsible for taking the data that the computer wishes
to send and converting it to a series of pulses or tones on the phone
line.  In the early days of computing, modems were acoustically
coupled to the line, meaning that you literally took the receiver of
your phone off hook and put it into a special device that had cups
over the speaker and microphone to allow the modem to "hear" and
"talk" to the phone's handset.  These modems are limited in terms of
their data rate by the accuracy with which they can listen to the
phone, and the accuracy that the phone can listen to them (as well as
the physical compatibility of the phone, but in this era everyone had
the same phone for $reasons).

The better kind of modem is obviously a modem that is directly
connected to the phone line so that it can process the signals
electronically.  These modems can either be internal or external.
Almost universally the external modems present a serial port to the
host machine, even if they are connected by a dramatically newer
interface such as USB.  Most modems that are external that have
withstood the test of time can be said to be "Hayes compatible".  This
refers to the compatibility of the modem with the Hayes command set
to configure the modem from the host machine.  Internal modems can
expose themselves as a serial port, but by the time modems were
commonly moving inside computers there was enough computing power on
the CPU that the modem didn't need its own onboard processor anymore.
These modems can collectively be referred to as "winmodems" as they
almost universally use a kernel mode windows driver which makes them
unusable in any other environment.  Rarely there are winmodems for
which drivers in other operating systems exist, but these are the
exception and not the rule.

For my dial-up experiments I dug out an old iBook clamshell laptop
which has an integrated modem.  As it is running MacOS 9.2, I don't
need to worry about whether its a Hayes compatible modem or a software
driven modem as the OS has the drivers for it handily baked in.

I also have a small USB modem that presents a Hayes compatible
interface, but the support for dialing a modem is surprisingly hard to
get fully running in my Linux distro of choice, so this remains an
adventure for a future date.

For my phone switch I'm using a [Cisco 2811 Integrated Services
Router](https://www.cisco.com/web/ANZ/cpp/refguide/hview/router/2800.html)
(ISR) loaded with several T1 VWIC modules to allow it to act as my TDM
network.  The 2811 is a dated system at this point and can barely pass
IP traffic at around 50Mbps, barely fast enough to sustain a bonded
DSL connection on a modern network without any firewalls or policy
routing.  Fortunately for my purposes it only needs to support TDM
traffic, which happens entirely in hardware on a timeslot interchange.
Timeslot interchanges are dedicated chips that perform realtime
handling of TDM data.  I configured the ISR by connecting to it with
the standard console cable and configuring via the terminal.

The ISR only has T1/E1 interfaces though, so to plug a phone into it a
device needs to break out the trunk into individual circuits like what
you'd find on your wall.  Such a device is commonly referred to as a
channel bank because it takes the 24 channels of a T1 interface and
turns them into 24 separate phone lines.  In my phone system I have a
Zhone ZPlex 10, which takes the cake as the strangest networking
component I've ever used.  The configuration interface is not context
aware, but the configuration is.  The company behind it still exists,
but has precious little in terms of documentation.  Overall its a
strange 1U device.  When I initially started this project I was using
a Carrier Access Adit 600, which is proper carrier grade equipment.
Its a unit designed to go in a roadside equipment cabinet and has a
modular interface to split out source circuits into individual
customer lines, make use of onboard modems, or a myriad of other
functions I'm not interested in right now.  The Adit is however
designed for roadside cabinets, not rack mount environments, so it was
ultimately swapped out for the Zhone.  From the Zhone a 25-pair cable
runs to a breakout panel that provides 24 RJ-11 jacks for me to
connect phones and modems to.  A cable runs from this patch panel over
to the iBook's modem port to connect it to the phone system.

In a traditional phone system all the components up to this point
would be owned by the phone company.  These components comprise the
local loop between my customer equipment and the phone company, the
local switch and supporting hardware, and most importantly, the
billing systems that work out just how much of my arms and legs I need
to fork over for the privilege of using my 64k circuit.  Fortunately
as my own phone provider I can offer a significant discount to myself.

When dialing in though the phone company is only half of the equation.
You need to actually connect to an internet service provider to be
provided with internet services.  Now these are often operating units
within the phone company providing added value, but historically there
were many different independent small dial-up operators.  Large or small
though, the problems are the same.  To provide dial-up internet you
need to have an access number, some number of modems to answer
incoming calls, and a means of interconnecting the sessions from the
modem banks to an IP network ultimately interconnected with either the
internet (today) or a subscriber network (as in the early days of AOL,
Prodigy, and Compuserve).

Its possible to build this component using a linux server and a
handful of modems, or to hook up something like a Dialogic card and
write a service routine to act like a modem bank.  There's also
purpose build hardware to fill this niche like the Cisco ASA line.
Through the fine art of hunting around on eBay and similar sites, I
was able to source a [Patton Electronics Dialfire
2960](https://www.patton.com/products/product_detail.asp?id=21), which
is probably the most 90's sounding electronic device I've ever heard
of or purchased.

The dialfire is a complete dial-up system in a box.  It provides a 1U
Remote Access Server that understands PPP, SLIP, ISDN, and a host of
other strange and obscure protocols.  It does this with a handful of
specialized chips that decode the line data and hand it off to a more
general purpose processor.  The unit is dual PSU as is most serious
infrastructure equipment, and takes up to 4 T1/E1 WAN connections for
up to 96 concurrent calls.  Mine is only equipped to handle 24
concurrent calls, but looking in the circuit board its clear that the
only difference with the larger models were more Digital Signal
Processing chips being added, and perhaps some more memory added in
footprints that are unpopulated on mine.  Its capable of 10/100 IP
networking and has a fun repeating background GIF on all the
configuration pages that I haven't figured out how to turn off yet.
The Dialfire is connected to the ISR via a short T1 crossover cable
and is configured to provide PPP as the default service if the client
doesn't request anything else.  Right now I'm configuring the
Dialfire's onboard authentication database, but ultimately I'd like to
proxy its RADIUS capabilities to NetAuth and use dynamic user
elements.  Since it only supports PAP authentication it would play
well with external authentication.

So overall the connection path is as follows:

  * iBook plugs in via modem cable to the patch panel and via a fat
    interconnect in the rack to the Zhone channel bank.
  * Zhone channel bank is connected via T1 to the ISR and has all 24
    trunks configured as loop start devices with DNs 800-823
    corresponding to ports 1-24 on the patch panel.
  * ISR connects to the Dialfire via T1 and will pass calls to the
    Dialfire when its access number is called.
  * Dialfire is connected to an Ethernet switch via standard Ethernet.
  * Ethernet switch is connected back to the ISR's IP side where it
    NATs out to my experimental VLAN.

At this point its possible to use Remote Access in Mac OS 9.2.2 to
dial the Dialfire's access number and have PPP pick up and connect.
From there the experience is just as it would have been in 2000.  Of
course the web has moved on since 2000 to bigger and "better" things,
so there are many sites that no longer work or perform poorly.  The
iBook's crypto stack is almost completely obsolete, and many sites
that it might be able to render can't connect because the client and
server no longer share a common key exchange algorithm or cipher
suite.  Remember that up until LetsEncrypt TLS was generally speaking
not free and generally speaking was only in use on larger sites that
had a financial reason to use it.  Now that every blog, homepage, and
webring has TLS these vintage computers can't really access it.

To combat this problem I have a [web rendering
proxy](https://github.com/tenox7/wrp) that runs on a standard x86_64
small form factor server which I can use to "cheat" the modern web and
effectively run a browser inside a browser.  As this is effectively
remote desktop in a browser to chrome I am trying to avoid it, and
hope to soon replace it with a TLS stripping proxy.

So what have I learned from building the crappiest ISP in existence?
I've learned a lot about the world of circuit switched and guaranteed
bandwidth applications.  The TDM buses in this system have absolutely
zero question w.r.t. the bandwidth available at any given time as its
all pre-calculated as part of the multiplexing.  I've also learned
that the equipment running the telephony stack is pretty much
bulletproof, far more than any of the IP networking systems I work
with in my day-job.  Its clear that the telephony world is built for
absolute reliability in the face of disaster, perhaps that's a subject
for a future post...

Hopefully you've enjoyed what you've read here, this is only
scratching the surface, and if you want to learn more about how the
public switched phone system (PSTN) works I highly recommend the book
Exploding The Phone by Phil Lapsley.  If you're interested in more of
the early days of computer networking, and what hijinks occurred on the
early nets I also highly recommend The Cuckoo's Egg by Cliff Stoll.
These two books are what inspired me to learn more about the phone
system and networked world around me.
