---
title: "Unstable DisplayPort video on 12th and 13th Gen Intel"
date: 2023-12-30T14:29:18-06:00
---

TL;DR - If you're using USB-C displays with Intel 12th or 13th gen
hardeware, its probably a DRI firmware issue in the i915 kernel
module.  Roll back your DMC blob to `adlp_dmc_ver2_16.bin`.

I've recently been building a machine for doing video production work
at the robotics competitions I support as well as other small events
where a video mux is required.  In my pursuit of ever smaller
footprints to load in and load out, I switched late this year to using
a pair of portable USB-C monitors that accept displayport over USB-C.
In order to connect these to my machines of choice and supply them
with enough power, I use a CalDigit Element 3 hub.  I can speak very
highly of the build quality of the CalDigit equipment in general, but
one thing I noticed using both a Framework 12th generation mainboard
and an Asus ExpertCenter with 13th generation Intel was that over
time, my displays would lock up completely and I would no longer be
able to access the machine.

For me, the lockups were characterized by the following messages in
`dmesg` repeating consistently:

```
[ 3308.663655] i915 0000:00:02.0: [drm] *ERROR* [CONNECTOR:272:DP-3] commit wait timed out
[ 3318.903615] i915 0000:00:02.0: [drm] *ERROR* [CRTC:131:pipe B] flip_done timed out
[ 3359.351470] i915 0000:00:02.0: [drm] *ERROR* flip_done timed out
[ 3359.351475] i915 0000:00:02.0: [drm] *ERROR* [CRTC:131:pipe B] commit wait timed out
[ 3369.591431] i915 0000:00:02.0: [drm] *ERROR* flip_done timed out
[ 3369.591437] i915 0000:00:02.0: [drm] *ERROR* [CONNECTOR:272:DP-3] commit wait timed out
[ 3379.832395] i915 0000:00:02.0: [drm] *ERROR* [CRTC:131:pipe B] flip_done timed out
[ 3390.071475] i915 0000:00:02.0: [drm] *ERROR* flip_done timed out
```

Its important to note that the machine is still up and running even
when the displays have locked up, and connecting via SSH still yeilds
a running system.  For a computer doing video work, however, not
having stable video kind of defeats the purpose.  After lots of
debugging and chasing bugs, I stumbled upon [this
thread](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/drm/intel/-/issues/8421#note_0)
which suggests that among other things, this is the result of the
render pipeline getting into a bad state.  The response from November
24th by user `mkyral` turned out to be the answer for my issue, which
was setting the `dmc_firmware_path` attribute on the i915 module.  To
make this change I created a file at `/etc/modprobe.d/i915.conf` with
the following content:

```
options i915 enable_guc=3 dmc_firmware_path=/lib/firmware/i915/adlp_dmc_ver2_16.bin
```

I also enabled some additional performance modes when I was editing
this file.  If you don't need or want these, omit the `enable_guc=3`
token.

Since this file needs to be present in the initrd to be loaded
extremely early, I also created a configuration file for dracut in
`/etc/dracut.conf.d/i915.conf` to include the file to the initrd:

```
install_items+=/etc/modprobe.d/i915.conf
```

After creating these files and regenerating the initrd, I rebooted and
verified that the path was picked up with `systool`:

```
$ sudo systool -m i915 -av | grep dmc_firmware_path
    dmc_firmware_path   = "/lib/firmware/i915/adlp_dmc_ver2_16.bin"
```

My system has been stable for about a day and a half since setting
this configuration.  Since this was basically ungoogleable, this post
is now up with the exact steps I took to resolve this until Intel can
fix whatever's wrong in the closed source blob.
