---
title: "Cosplaying as a Telco: VCF Southwest 2025"
date: 2025-06-25T16:44:44-05:00
---

This is the third year I have stood up SneakyNet, my fake telephone
company at the Southwest Vintage Computer Festival.  SneakyNet
supplies dial-tone and IP transit to exhibitors around the show, and
does so with a mix of period correct and modern hardware.  I thought
it would be fun to take a step back and talk about how this whole
network is put together, and how things actually work.

Before we dive too deeply, more documentation than you could ever want
can be found on the main SneakyNet docs site:
<https://docs.sneaky.nonroutable.network/>.

First off, lets start with the Vintage Computer Festival itself.  This
event is an open-to-the-public exposition of technology, collections,
and integrated swap meet of all things old tech.  There's hardware
ranging from old Apple computers to a myriad of early windows
machines, old terminal services clusters and groovy 70s terminals to
use them with, and of course, a smattering of telephones on any free
table spaces.

## Why Do I Do This?

I think its fun to bring in the telephone infrastructure.  It connects
things together in ways that many other exhibitors are not really
resourced to do, and providing connectivity has always been something
I'm fascinated by.  The concept of action at a distance really draws
me in, and the idea of a private telephone network is very cool on its
own.

Since I'm already dropping thousands of feet of cable for telephony,
its not a huge stretch to then drop a few thousand more feet of cable
to turn up wifi and make modern devices able to connect as well.  This
year we also dropped Ethernet to tables that requested it, but I think
in the future we'll heavily restrict Ethernet based on high request
rate and low utilization rate.  Its a lot of work to pull cable that
isn't used.

## How Do I Do This?

Planning for the show starts about 4 months prior with the initial
venue walks, table plans, and nailing down what I want to exhibit.
This year I had 5 main things I wanted to work on to improve my
exhibit at the show:

  * Terminal Services - I had bought a Cisco AS5300 with MICA modem
    card last year, but didn't get around to doing anything with it.
    I wanted to have a terminal services system that people could dial
    into in order to access information resources anachronistic to the
    era of the requesting machine.  There's something fun about
    calling up a search engine from a vt100.

  * Better Provisioning - In years past, its been difficult to farm
    out work to people who want to help me, because the network is
    big, complicated, and relies on a lot of deep domain specific
    knowledge to setup and operate.  This year I wanted to focus on
    breaking down the setup components into things that other people
    could help with and make work, so that it wasn't all riding on my
    shoulders to make it happen.

  * Full Day 0 Setup - Dropping all the cable, setting up everything
    on the floor, and testing the network is fairly disruptive to
    exhibitors loading in.  I wanted to have all of this done before
    the exhibitors were in the building so that they'd walk in and
    their services would already be provisioned.  I'm reasonably happy
    with how this went, but I should have done more work up-front to
    work out how long cables needed to be so they didn't have to be
    fabricated on-site.

  * Billing - Last year at VCFMW I worked with the ShadyTel team to
    bring billing to their show.  This runs on top of a very custom
    suite of software, and I wanted to polish and improve it for this
    show.  The software worked well, but there are still a few things
    I want to work on which I'll discuss more below.

  * Spellcheck - Last year mid way through the show I realized I had
    misspelled "Telecommunications" spelling it with only one 'm'.
    This wouldn't have been so bad if it weren't on my Polo's,
    high-visibility vests, exhibitor name cards, and dozens of other
    places.  Fortunately no-one seemed to notice as I suspect most
    people don't know how to spell the word, but it was something I
    certainly wanted to fix this year.  Unfortunately I did not meet a
    100% success rate on this as in my service brochures ADSL became
    ASDL, but there's always next year.


## Custom Technology

By far the most complex and custom technology of the entire show is
what started out as the billing engine, but is now an entire CRM with
plant management features.  This software which I've chosen to call
[MoneyPrinter2](https://github.com/sneakynet/moneyprinter2/) is a full
featured multi-tenant service ordering, billing, and tracking suite
that is hyper-specialized to the kinds of networks that happen at a
vintage computer festival.

MoneyPrinter2 knows about every customer, the services they've
ordered, and where to deliver those services.  It can generate
directories, work orders, and once usage information is ingested even
billing printouts.  Some of the next improvements I intend to make are
to make statistics reporting faster and easier, and to improve the
overall experience of managing the network.

MoneyPrinter2 is by far one of the more complex software suites I've
worked on recently, but its complexity does a good job of highlighting
the underlying complexity of the network it manages.  The physical
network is based on technology ranging from the late 80s up to the
current day, and this isn't something that lends itself well to high
layers of abstractions, so achieving the unified layers that do exist
is already an achievement I'm proud of.  There's still work to do, but
the system is more than functional today.

## A Bit of Cosplay

I do attend the show in costume.  I wear monogrammed polo shirts that
bear the SneakyNet logo which is a cohesive design element across the
entire network.  I dress as an engineer would have in the early 2000s,
and my demeanor is all about improving revenue for the company.  Its a
fun bit that fits well with the image that the phone company doesn't
necessarily care as much about delivering you the best service, only
the most billable services.

This aspect is a lot of fun, and is something that's even more fun at
other shows where we have multiple different phone companies
operating, because then you see everyone in their different shirts and
vests.  Maintaining the cohesive brand is also fun, as it draws
people's eyes away from the less thought out parts of the exhibit.

An example of this is the large ladder racking system I used to cross
over an aisle so that no large-diameter cables were on the floor
during the show.  This worked extremely well even given the immense
weight of the ladder sections.  It did, however, have a significant
visual presence, and so I slapped some SneakyNet plaques on it and
referred to it throughout the show as the non-toll-free bridge, which
always got at least a sensible chuckle from people when they heard it.

## My Top 5

The show certainly wasn't without some hiccups this year, but here are
my top 5 from the weekend.

  * `techav`'s terminal servers.  These hand-built terminal servers
    are really neat and definitely a modern take on another era.  They
    provided a service another member of the show was dialed into over
    all three days, which provided a unique experience over connecting
    to SneakyNet's own terminal services cluster.

  * Tandy Showcase - Always a fan favorite, I never get tired of
    seeing the incredible world of Tandy and the Radio Shack brand
    from my youth.  Eddie maintains a very complete on-line presence
    at <https://tandyshowcase.com> so if you have fond memories of
    Radio Shack be sure to check it out.

  * Forgotten Machines - If you've gone to a vintage computing
    festival, you've met AJ Palmgren of Forgotten Machines.  His high
    energy personality keeps everyone on their toes, and his selection
    of unique and rare machines is always a treat to look at.  AJ's
    energy truly knows no bounds, even performing an operatic closing
    to the show as we were loading out.  I don't know how this was
    possible, as my voice was completely shot by then, but my hat is
    off all the same.

  * Genericable always impresses me.  This fully functioning cable
    headend shows the later generations of technology that would
    supplant the telephone system in the late nineties and early 2000s
    forcing further innovation.  Their multiple weather stars made
    sure everyone knew that it is in fact hot in Texas, and that it
    was going to continue to be hot for the next several days.  I'm
    always impressed with how knowledgeable and how kind the team is,
    and I always walk away having learned something new.

  * Mid way through day 1, an exhibitor came running up to inform us
    that there was a second DHCP server somewhere on the exhibitor
    span that was handing out bad addresses.  This led to a who-dunnit
    mystery of finding where the DHCP server was and isolating it from
    the rest of the network, though not before making a
    tongue-and-cheek announcement to the floor that people could avoid
    the shame of getting caught by checking their DHCP servers
    themselves.  This certainly led to a a lot of people checking
    their equipment, and a morbid curiosity from the floor if we'd
    caught the culprit.  In reality, we turned on DHCP snooping and
    set trust on the ports facing the real DHCP server, then called it
    a day.  The culprit did eventually own up to their dynamically
    configured misdeeds, revealing that they'd needed a switch, pulled
    some hardware from the free table, and only later realized that
    they'd plugged in a linksys home router to the network.  Certainly
    an interesting afternoon, all things considered.


## Looking to the Future

I'll be next at VCF MidWest in the Chicago area, and then getting
ready to start up planning and setup for VCFSW next year.  Its a fun
project, but a lot of work and effort.  Something that I would like to
keep doing long into the future.
